# Fallout: Wasteland Wanderer - Chapter 1: Introduction

## Chapter 1

### INTRODUCTION

Welcome to Fallout: Wasteland Wanderer, the Solo Roleplaying game set in the grand yet terrifying Wasteland of the Fallout universe. Using this book, you will be able to create a Vault Dweller character, step out into the Wasteland, and write your own adventure throughout the various rad-ruined locales, facing danger, finding loot, and above all, exploring the Wasteland!

"Just a word to my Wasteland friends out there. Stay safe, stay healthy, and above-all, stay happy." - Agatha

### WHAT IS THE WASTELAND?

If you are familiar with the Wasteland and its many dangers, this book can be used to simulate them all and bring the post-apocalypse to life. If, however, you haven't interacted with the Fallout universe prior to reading this book, we recommend starting your reading with Chapter 2: The Wasteland of America (pg.18).

Following the Great War of 2077, the United States of America no longer exists, at least not in the traditional sense. Towering cities have been reduced to ash-packed skeletons, bounteous farmlands have been blasted into arid desertscapes and the innumerable monuments of the past have been rendered into meaningless husks of themselves—bedecked with bullet holes and graffiti. On the whole, the surface of a once great nation has been reduced and reformed into the Wasteland of America; a new world, and a new world, requires a new people.

Monsters, Raiders, Super Mutants, and more call this new world home, carving up portions of its mutated flesh for themselves, using violence and the threat of it to keep others of their own kind and the few wary Survivors subjugated and afraid. For the violent, life up here is short but easy to understand; for those trying to live otherwise, life is still short but far more complex.

However, there are those who are raised apart from the chaos, the Vault Dwellers (pg.44), men, women, and children packed away in grand underground Vaults, safe from the worst the world has to offer. Many, though, were not as safe as the advertisements promised, finding themselves suddenly exposed to all manner of experimentation secretly organized by the same company that promised them a new home. Many Vault Dwellers, as well as their extended bloodlines, live in blissful ignorance of these bizarre experiments, whereas others can't help but be aware of the atrocities doled out upon them—chems pumped into the air, killer robots demanding sacrifices and the like aren't exactly fates one can ignore. Regardless of what fates befall them in the Vaults, many Dwellers manage to make their way out from the confines of their homes and into the Wasteland beyond, to whatever fate awaits them.

In Fallout: Wasteland Wanderer, you will create one of these Vault Dwellers and begin to tell their story, from their life within the Vault to their first step outside of it and perhaps even their last breath in the landscape beyond.

"Like I said, there's a lot you can learn from old books." - Caesar

---

## USING THIS BOOK

Fallout: Wasteland Wanderer provides you all the information you need to begin telling your own stories in the Wasteland, as well as the Rules needed to engage in this Solo 2d20 roleplaying experience. Across the eight chapters of this book, you will learn:

* **Chapter 1: Introduction**
* **Chapter 2: The Wasteland of America (pg.18)** — In this Chapter we discuss the world of Fallout, its inhabitants, and the themes that consistently appear within Fallout stories.
* **Chapter 3: Character Creation (pg.50)** — In this chapter, we discuss how to build your first character in Wasteland Wanderer.
* **Chapter 4: How to Play (pg.82)** — In this chapter, we discuss the core mechanics of Wasteland Wanderer.
* **Chapter 5: Telling Your Story (pg.106)** — In this chapter, we discuss how you will be recording and telling your character's story.
* **Chapter 6: Quests (pg.146)** — In this chapter, we discuss how to generate Quests during your time with Wasteland Wanderer.
* **Appendix 1: Perks (pg.150)** — This appendix lists all the Perks available in Wasteland Wanderer.
* **Appendix 2: Roll Tables (pg.158)** — This appendix houses all the Random Roll Tables.
* **Appendix 3: Foe Stat Blocks (pg.219)** — This appendix houses all the Stat Blocks for the Foes of Wasteland Wanderer.
* **Appendix 4: Pip-Boy Diagrams (pg.248)** — This appendix houses a photocopiable version of the Pip-Boy Sheets required for play.

### Designers Note: Table References
Throughout Fallout: Wasteland Wanderer, you will find numerous references to the tables in the appendix section of this book. These will always be in reference to generating either a number of things or a specific story instance (a creature, item, weapon, or location, for example). When these are used, they will often follow the below format: Generate [QUANTITY] pg.167 of [SUPPLIES] pg.172 In these examples, the page reference of the appropriate Generation Table will always be listed, allowing for rapid access to that information. All Tables, except those used in Character Creation, are held in the Appendix for ease of reference throughout your time with Fallout: Wasteland Wanderer and are noted in the contents page as well as in page references.

---

## GETTING STARTED

Besides this book, a few things are needed to begin telling your own Fallout adventure, which are listed here:

### PIP-BOY SHEETS
The Pip-Boy Sheets are one of the main tools you will make use of during your adventures, made up of three double-sided sheets (called Tabs namely the Stats and Inventory Tab, the Data Tab, and the Map Tab). The Pip-Boy Sheets are where you will track all of the important information that makes your Vault Dweller yours, from their Statistics to their Gear to where they're going next. The usage of these sheets is explained more as the book continues. Pip-Boy Sheets are available on the Modiphius Downloads page or can be photocopied from the diagrams found in Appendices 4: Pip-Boy Diagrams (pg.248).

### A NOTEPAD OR VOICE RECORDER
Whereas the Pip-Boy Sheets will help you organize and control the rules and mechanics of your adventure, your Notepad or Voice Recorder is how you will record the story of it. You may use either a notepad, diary, random assortment of musty old papers, or even a voice recorder to tell your story. This tool acts as your way of giving your character a voice and tracking their adventures over the length of your time with Wasteland Wanderer.

### NOTETAKING TOOLS
Pencils, erasers, pens, and any other items that will help you record, track, and alter the information you will be listing on both your Pip-Boy Sheets and possible Notepad.

### TWO TWENTY-SIDED DICE
Often abbreviated to 2d20 (with the 2 representing the number of dice and the d20 representing the number of sides on those dice), every player of Wasteland Wanderer will use these dice throughout their adventure to determine the success or failure of their actions and help direct their overall narrative. How the dice are used is described more in Chapter 4: How to Play (pg.82). If you need dice or simply want to pick up a set with more of a Fallout feel, the Modiphius webstore has several variations to offer!

### ALL ACCOUNTED FOR?
Once you've assembled all of the above, you're ready to begin telling your own Wasteland story. Different people have different ways of starting out with a game like Wasteland Wanderer; some may choose to grab their Pip-Boy Sheet and delve straight into Character Creation, getting to the meat of their adventure as quickly as possible. Others may elect to read this book cover-to-cover first, learning all they can before starting off—neither option is wrong; neither option is right. Use your best judgment and, above all, enjoy yourself.

"Wally said my Pip-Boy was a piece of junk!" - The Wasteland Wanderer

---

## THE PIP-BOY SHEETS

In order to create your character and play Fallout: Wasteland Wanderer, you will need access to a Pip-Boy Sheet, as discussed in Getting Started. These three double-sided sheets are broken down into Tabs, The Stats and Inventory Tab, The Data Tab, and The Map Tab. Each Tab is used to track different information, all of which will be invaluable to you during your adventures! The Tabs and the most relevant information on them are listed here:

### THE STATS AND INVENTORY TAB

The Core use of this Tab is to track your character, all your character's Statistics (i.e. Level, S.P.E.C.I.A.L Attributes, Skills, HP, LP, AP, Perks, and Injuries), and their Inventory (Supplies, Caps, and Gear). These sections begin blank but get filled in and added to as you start and playthrough your character's adventure.

#### Stacks of Caps
Caps in Wasteland Wanderer are a valuable resource, but not one we count individually. Instead when gaining or loosing caps you will be instructed to gain, loose, or pay in "stacks". These range from 1 stack of caps, which is enough to get by, to 5 stacks of caps, which is a small fortune.

The Stats and Inventory Tabs consist of the following elements:
1. **Vault Dweller Name:** The name of your character, chosen during Character Creation.
2. **Level:** Your character's current Level.
3. **S.P.E.C.I.A.L.:** Your character's Attribute ratings.
4. **Skills:** Your character's Skill ratings.
5. **Health Points (HP):** Your character's current and maximum Health Points.
6. **Luck Points (LP):** Your character's current and maximum Luck Points.
7. **Action Points (AP):** Your character's current and maximum Action Points.
8. **Supplies:** Your character's current stack of Supplies.
9. **Caps:** Your character's current stack of Caps.
10. **Gear:** A list of all the equipment and Gear your character is carrying with them.
11. **Perks:** Your characters chosen Perks.
12. **Injuries:** The Injuries your character is currently suffering from.

---

### THE DATA TAB

The Data Tab is used to track a list of the important NPCs your character has met along their journey, as well as the Quests they are currently working on. It contains the following elements:

#### 1. NPCs
A list of the most important and most relevant NPCs your character has met along their journey. This section lists their Name, Truth, and Location.

| VAULT DWELLER | REGION |
| --- | --- |
| NPC NAME: <br><br> TRUTHS: <br><br> LOCATION: | NPC NAME: <br><br> TRUTHS: <br><br> LOCATION: |
| NPC NAME: <br><br> TRUTHS: <br><br> LOCATION: | NPC NAME: <br><br> TRUTHS: <br><br> LOCATION: |
| NPC NAME: <br><br> TRUTHS: <br><br> LOCATION: | NPC NAME: <br><br> TRUTHS: <br><br> LOCATION: |
| NPC NAME: <br><br> TRUTHS: <br><br> LOCATION: | NPC NAME: <br><br> TRUTHS: <br><br> LOCATION: |
| NPC NAME: <br><br> TRUTHS: <br><br> LOCATION: | NPC NAME: <br><br> TRUTHS: <br><br> LOCATION: |
| NPC NAME: <br><br> TRUTHS: <br><br> LOCATION: | NPC NAME: <br><br> TRUTHS: <br><br> LOCATION: |
| NPC NAME: <br><br> TRUTHS: <br><br> LOCATION: | NPC NAME: <br><br> TRUTHS: <br><br> LOCATION: |

#### 2. Quests
A list of your character's Active Quests, both their Side and Main Quests. This section lists the Quest name, Notes, Location, and Reward.

* **QUEST NAME / NOTES / LOCATION / REWARD**
* **QUEST NAME / NOTES / LOCATION / REWARD**
* **QUEST NAME / NOTES / LOCATION / REWARD**
* **QUEST NAME / NOTES / LOCATION / REWARD**
* **QUEST NAME / NOTES / LOCATION / REWARD**
* **QUEST NAME / NOTES / LOCATION / REWARD**
* **QUEST NAME / NOTES / LOCATION / REWARD**
* **QUEST NAME / NOTES / LOCATION / REWARD**
* **QUEST NAME / NOTES / LOCATION / REWARD**
* **MAIN QUEST / NOTES / LOCATION / REWARD / BLOCKER LOCATION**

---

### THE MAP TAB

The Map Tab helps you track where your character has been and where they may choose to go. The Map and how to expand it are explained in various sections of this book, but mostly in Travel (pg.108).

When you create a new Map, it is made up of 25 separate squares called Locations. The most central location is your Vault, your starting point. Four additional Locations should be randomly selected and marked as Impassable; these are spaces in the Wasteland too dense, dangerous, or topographically difficulty to actively travel into or out of. The remaining 20 spaces should still then be blank. Now, mark those Locations numbers 1-20 in ascending order from the top left to the bottom right corners.

The Map Tab consists of the following elements:
1. **Vault Dweller Name:** Your character's name.
2. **Region:** The name of the Region in the Wasteland your adventure takes place in.
3. **The Map:** A grid of 25 squares, either designated by a Number, a Vault, or as an Impassable Location.
4. **The Vault:** The square at the center of the Map is your Vault, where your adventure will start.
5. **Impassable Locations:** Four squares on the Map are Impassable Locations, usually denoted by a graphical location such as a coastline or mountain range.
6. **Vault Information:** This section is used to keep track of your Starting Vault, its Truths, and any known NPCs there.
7. **Location Information:** The 20 specific Location Information sections on the reverse of the Map Tab are used to keep track of the 20 Locations, their Truths, and any NPCs that may call them home.

"Who are you, that do not know your history?" — Ulysses

---

### REVERSE SIDE DATA TRACKING (VAULT & LOCATIONS)

#### 6. VAULT
* **TRUTH / SETTLEMENT / REPUTATION**

#### 7. LOCATIONS
* **1:** TRUTH / SETTLEMENT / REPUTATION
* **2:** TRUTH / SETTLEMENT / REPUTATION
* **3:** TRUTH / SETTLEMENT / REPUTATION
* **4:** TRUTH / SETTLEMENT / REPUTATION
* **5:** TRUTH / SETTLEMENT / REPUTATION
* **6:** TRUTH / SETTLEMENT / REPUTATION
* **7:** TRUTH / SETTLEMENT / REPUTATION
* **8:** TRUTH / SETTLEMENT / REPUTATION
* **9:** TRUTH / SETTLEMENT / REPUTATION
* **10:** TRUTH / SETTLEMENT / REPUTATION
* **11:** TRUTH / SETTLEMENT / REPUTATION
* **12:** TRUTH / SETTLEMENT / REPUTATION
* **13:** TRUTH / SETTLEMENT / REPUTATION
* **14:** TRUTH / SETTLEMENT / REPUTATION
* **15:** TRUTH / SETTLEMENT / REPUTATION
* **16:** TRUTH / SETTLEMENT / REPUTATION
* **17:** TRUTH / SETTLEMENT / REPUTATION
* **18:** TRUTH / SETTLEMENT / REPUTATION
* **19:** TRUTH / SETTLEMENT / REPUTATION
* **20:** TRUTH / SETTLEMENT / REPUTATION
