# Chapter 4: HOW TO PLAY

When playing through your character's story in Wasteland Wanderer, you will be regularly making decisions that will set the pace of the narrative, what your character does, and how they do it. But no story is complete without risk or an element of chance and failure; that is where the Rules and Tests of Wasteland Wanderer come into play. In this chapter, you will learn the mechanical structure of Wasteland Wanderer, how to perform a Skill Test, the Boons and Complications System, Action Points, The Oracle, as well as both Luck and Health. Once you've read through this section, you'll be prepared to move to Chapter 5: Telling Your Story.

> "Truth is... the game was rigged from the start." - Benny

## SKILL TESTS

Most of the gameplay of Wasteland Wanderer is led by the decisions you make during Encounters and Travel. However, to determine the outcome of your decisions, you will often be asked to perform a Skill Test; but what is a Skill Test?

Simply put, a Skill Test is when you roll dice to determine if you succeed or fail in the action you are attempting to take. It is assumed that your character is competent enough to deal with most everyday tasks, such as walking down the road, taking a drink, or tying their shoes; however, some tasks are more dangerous and inherently have a risk tied to failure. When this is the case, you will need to make a Skill Test. The Skill Test will ask you to check your character's Attributes and Skills, determine how your character intends to try and overcome the problem in front of them, and then roll dice to determine how well, or poorly, it goes for them.

To make a Skill Test, you will need to perform a four-step process: Determine your Goal, Determine your Solution, Determine your Obstacles, and finally, the Skill Test.

### DETERMINE YOUR GOAL

The first step of a Skill Test is determining what you're trying to accomplish and how difficult that would be. As mentioned above, in Wasteland Wanderer, we assume your character is competent enough to deal with any run-of-the-mill situation, but more complex tasks carry risk, and risk offers the opportunity to tell a more interesting story. Whenever you are deciding what your character's current goal is, ask yourself the following questions:

* Are there any repercussions if I fail this action?
* Is my character in danger while undertaking this action?
* Is there a time constraint on this action?

If you answer yes to any of these, then you will need to perform a Skill Test to determine the outcome of your attempt to achieve the set goal.

**Skill Test Example: Determine your Goal**
Ben's Vault Dweller 'Nicholas Rose' has just left the Vault and is walking the Wasteland in search of his prey; a Legendary Deathclaw. However, before he has any chance of achieving that goal, he has to deal with a much simpler one, finding some water. Currently, Nick is in the Wasteland, and Ben needs to Determine his Goal, which is to find a drink of water. So he asks himself the questions listed above-and answers accordingly.
* Are there any repercussions if I fail this action? - Yes, Nick will become dehydrated.
* Is my character in danger while undertaking this action? - Not right now.
* Is there a time constraint on this action? - Yes, Nick will need to drink soon.

With the questions answered, Ben has determined that he will need to make a Skill Test to solve this problem, so he moves to the next stage: Determine your Solution.

### DETERMINE YOUR SOLUTION

Once you have determined your goal and that you'll need to perform a Skill Test, you need to determine a solution. A solution in Wasteland Wanderer is always determined by three Factors: your character's Attributes, Skills, and Equipment, deployed in a manner that will help achieve the set goal. When determining these Factors, you have two options:

* **Pick a Path:** Select an Action that matches your goal from those listed in Actions (pg.122)
* **Make Your Own:** Select a Skill (pg.65) that would help you achieve that goal.

Once you've selected your option, you need to determine if your character has what they need to execute your solution. In many cases, all they will need is their own Skills and a 'can-do' attitude; occasionally, however, a specific tool will be required-can't shoot a Raider without a gun, after all. When determining your solution, check your Inventory and make sure you have a piece of gear that will allow you to achieve what you want; if you don't, then you can't attempt the test.

Once you have selected one option and confirmed you have the needed Gear, Determine your Obstacles.

**Skill Test Example: Determine your Solution**
With his goal of 'Finding Water' in mind, Ben must Determine his Solution; to do so, he looks at his two options, Picking a Path or Making his Own. Checking over the Actions available, he doesn't find one that best suits his needs (although Scavenge comes close!), so he elects to Make his Own and decides that the Survival Skill will probably be best suited to help Nick find something to drink. With that in mind, he moves to Determine his Obstacles.

> "You will be faced with many challenges throughout your lifetime, and the most difficult of these will be dealing with your fellow man." - Cameron

### DETERMINE YOUR OBSTACLES

The mechanical Obstacle in front of you when creating your Skill Test is the Difficulty-the number of Successes you will need to obtain during the Skill Test to complete your goal. Normally, all Skill Tests will be Difficulty 1 (meaning it requires 1 or more Successes to overcome), although some listed in Actions (pg.122) will have different starting difficulties. However, additional Obstacles may increase the Difficulty of a test or even block those tests from being performed in the first place. When determining your goal, you will have already determined that there are likely small things standing in your character's way on their path to achieving their goal, be that danger, time, or something entirely different. Things that stand between your character, and what they want are called Obstacles and are typically linked to the Location Truths in the area you are performing the Skill Test. These Obstacles could be any number of things, including but not limited to:

* **Dangerous Terrain** (A harsh climb, overheated sand, a radioactive river...)
* **Barriers** (A locked safe, building, forcefield...)
* **Inconveniences** (Hidden in a room, hungry character, unequipped...)

Each Obstacle in your way will alter the Difficulty of a test, increasing it by 1. Each Obstacle is treated as a Negative Truth. Once each Obstacle has been determined, you can move to attempt the Skill Test.

**Skill Test Example: Determine your Obstacles**
Having decided to have Nick attempt a Survival Check to find some fresh drinking water, he quickly looks to see if there are any Obstacles. He starts by checking his Map Tab and the Location Truths of where Nick is located, which are Wasteland and Barren. The Barren Truth is an Obstacle in Nick's search for water-as there will be less to find-so the Difficulty of the test is increased by 1. Knowing this, Ben prepares to attempt the Skill Test.

### THE SKILL TEST

Now that you know the Goal, Solution, and Obstacles, you can make the Skill Test! To make a skill Test, you gather up your two twenty-sided dice (2d20) and determine the Target Number you need to roll under on those dice to generate a Success. A Target Number is determined in Wasteland Wanderer by the Skill you are using to complete the Skill Test and is equal to the character's Ranks of the Skill in question plus the value of the Governing Attribute. So a character with a Survival of 4 and an Endurance of 9 would have a Target Number of 13 when making a Survival Skill Test.

**Target Number**
Skill Rank (SR) + Governing Attribute Value (AV) = Target Number (TN).

Once you have determined your Target Number, roll your 2d20; for each dice that shows a result equal to, or less than your Target Number, you gain one Success-if you gain Successes equal to, or greater than your Difficulty, you Pass the Test and achieve your goal! If you do not gain enough Successes, though, the Test is Failed, and you suffer the Consequences of that failure. Traditionally, simply not succeeding is consequence enough; however, in some situations, they may be greater. If you Pass the Test and achieve your goal, the Skill Test ends, and your character does what they set out to do! They shoot the Raider, convince the barman to forget their tab, hack the computer, or otherwise move your story forward.

**Skill Test Example: The Skill Test**
Having determined the Obstacle for Nick's search for water, Ben picks up his 2d20 and prepares to make his Skill Test. As he established that using the Survival Skill was part of his solution, he checks his Target Number using Nick's Data Tab, whose Survival Skill Ranks are 4, and their Governing Attribute (Endurance) is 9-meaning that the Target Number for the test is 13. He established the Tests' difficulty in the Obstacles step, which only had 1 Obstacle, totaling a Difficulty 2 Test. With all of the above information known, Ben rolls his 2d20, scoring a 4 and a 12-2 Successes, as both are below Nick's Target Number! This means that Nick has passed the Skill Test as a number of Successes equal to the difficulty were generated, so Ben then records in his Journal how Nick scours the Wasteland for a source of clean water. When determining the amount of water he finds, Ben refers to the [QUANTITY] table in the Appendix (pg.167) to see how many Supplies he adds to Nick's Inventory Tab.

> "You fought valiantly but to no avail. Your twisted and ruined body goes down in a hail of bullets and thus ends your life in the Wasteland." - The Narrator

### CRITICAL SUCCESS, COMPLICATIONS, AND CONSEQUENCES

During a Skill Test, your roll can generate a Critical Success and a Complication-which are, in order, a way of generating additional Successes and a way in which your story becomes more complex. A Critical Success, when rolled, generates two Successes rather than one. There are two ways in which you can generate a Critical Success, either by rolling a 1 on your d20 (otherwise referred to as a Natural 1) or by rolling under your Skill Rank when making a Skill Test when using a Tagged Skill (pg.68). You can only generate one Critical Success from any dice, so rolling a 1 on a Tagged Skill Test will still only generate one Critical Success, not two.

**Critical Success**
When rolling either a Natural 1 - OR - equal to or under your Skill Rank for a Tagged Skill Test, generate two Successes rather than one.

A Complication, however, is a narrative alteration to the situation that either makes the Consequences of the test worse or introduces a new problem even on a successful Skill Test. A Complication is generated when you roll a 20 on your d20 (otherwise referred to as a Natural 20) but does not affect the number of Successes generated on the roll. A Complication, when generated, will introduce one of three potential effects to your scene.

* **A Blocker:** If the Test is Failed but can be attempted again, then the Complication creates a Blocker. Follow the guidance in Skill Test Blockers (pg.88) to create a Blocker that feels narratively appropriate for the situation.
    * Example: Not only do you miss a shot with your combat rifle, but the magazine falls out and slips into a small crevice nearby. You need to pass a Small Guns Test of difficulty 1 to reload before you can use the gun again to reload under fire!
* **A Greater Consequence:** If the Test is Failed but cannot be attempted again, then the Consequence becomes more severe; think about how a failed situation can be worse and adapt the scene appropriately.
    * Example: In failing to hack a terminal, you set off a series of alarms across the NCR base you're infiltrating it won't be long until security arrives!
* **A Hiccup:** If the Test was Successful but a Complication was rolled, something goes minutely wrong with attaining your goal. This should still be problematic for the character, but not so that it undoes all of your hard work.
    * Example: After successfully sprinting away from a Deathclaw using the Retreat Action, you realize that your pack was open the whole run and you lost a few pieces of gear in doing so-you reduce your supplies by 1.

Complications should always act as an addition to the situation as a whole, not detract from it, and certainly not as a punishment when dictating the Complication affecting your character, always ask the question, "What's a way this could get slightly worse without ruining the fun?"

**Skill Test Blocker**
When you Create a Blocker as part of a Skill Test, you must determine what the Blocker is. Normally, this will be an impediment that wasn't immediately obvious when beginning the test, such as:
* A door that has an electronic deadlock after the lock was picked, meaning that the character must hack the electronic system...
* A Yao Guai drinking from the same waterhole you've been looking for...
* Sudden power loss turning out the lights in a room...
* A tripwire hidden among a food supply you notice just in time...

When this occurs, you will need to perform a separate Skill Test to overcome the Blocker before you can continue to your original goal. Follow the same steps as previously listed to determine the difficulty of the test and move through the stages as per usual, Determine your Goal > Determine your Solution > Determine your Obstacles > the Skill Test. Once the Skill Test is overcome, the Blocker is removed, and you can continue with your original goal. Keep in mind, however, some Blockers may force your character into a fight, in which case you'll need to defeat your Foe to remove the Blocker instead-see Combat (pg.98).

**Complication**
When rolling a Natural 20, introduce a narrative Complication to the scene.

### CONSEQUENCES

When you Fail a Skill Test, there are always Consequences. Failing to shoot a chem-frenzied Raider charging your way is likely going to have the Consequence of that Raider smacking you with a large piece of metal. Failing to barter for a lower price in Diamond City may end with you actually being charged more for goods just to teach you a lesson. Consequences are what happens when your character Fails a Skill Test the repercussions. As noted in the two examples above, Consequences are normally immediate payback for failing a course of action, often the removal of your goal or an inversion of it. When starting the process of taking a Skill Test, you will normally already know what happens should you Fail; however, remember that this is a story, and no story should end because the hero failed to unlock a door that one time. Failing forward is a common term in tabletop role-playing games, meaning that even when we fail, we should still advance the story in some way be sure to ask yourself how that could affect any failures your character encounters. For example, Failing a Repair check to fix up an old Mr. Handy breaks the robot but allows the character to find the manufacturer's address on the inside of the chassis; now this failure has expanded into a potential Side Quest.

Sometimes, a Consequence will lead to the Skill Test being unable to be completed, meaning that there is no way to reattempt it; other times, this won't be the case. Determine for yourself the narrative feeling of closing an avenue to yourself during play, whereas failing an explosives check to disarm a mini-nuke clumsily attached to an alarm clock could be catastrophic; having the timer merely half could be an exciting alternative.

### PICK A PATH ACTION

When Determining Your Solution in a Skill Test, you may elect to use one of the prewritten Actions written in this book. If you do so, check over the list of Actions available on (pg.122). These Actions are intended as quick ways of determining answers to common situations and should be used as templates for making informed decisions on how to curate your own Skill Tests and Actions based on the Make Your Own Solution choice. There is no wrong way to prepare a Skill Test, and it will often fall to you to make a call on what feels the most narratively satisfying for your character's story.

**Pick a Path Action Example - Find Supplies**

1. GOAL NAME AND SUGGESTED DIFFICULTY: Find Supplies - Difficulty 1
2. SOLUTIONS
   * Search for Supplies in the Wasteland: END (Survival)
   * Barter with locals: CHA (Barter)
3. SUGGESTED MODIFIERS
   * (+) If the location is short on naturally occurring food or water
   * (+) If the location is badly irradiated (Survival)
   * (+) You have a bad reputation with the locals (Barter)
   * (-) The location has an abundance of naturally occurring food or water
   * (-) You have a good reputation with the locals (Barter)
   * (-) You expend a Stack of Caps (Barter)
4. SUCCESS: You obtain a [QUANTITY] (pg.167) of [SUPPLIES] (pg.172).
5. FAILURE: You obtain no Supplies. This test can be attempted again.
6. ADDITIONAL SUCCESS: For each AP spent, generate 1 additional Supply.
7. POTENTIAL COMPLICATIONS:
   * 1 of your Supplies is spoiled; reduce the number received by 1.
   * Your Supplies are coveted by another! Generate a [FOE] (pg.189) interested in getting ahold of your Supplies.

Each of these Actions is broken down into seven distinct data points:
1.  **Goal Name and Suggested Difficulty:** The intended goal of the Action and the suggested starting difficulty of the needed Skill Test.
2.  **Solutions:** Example solutions to choose from. These are only suggestions, and you can substitute alternatives you feel could also help achieve the goal.
3.  **Suggested Modifiers:** A list of common obstacles and aids to the solution. Some will have a bracketed skill attached, demonstrating a modifier that would only be prevalent if using the noted Skill as part of your solution.
4.  **Success:** What happens if the test is successful.
5.  **Failure:** The consequences of failure and if you could attempt the solution again.
6.  **Additional Success:** Additional rewards you can gain if you spend Action Points following a successful test.
7.  **Potential Complications:** A few example Complications that could occur if one is generated.
Each Action is listed in Chapter 5: Telling Your Story (pg.106).

## ACTION POINTS

Action Points are an additional resource your character generates through Successful Skill Tests and Actions. Action Points are not a physical currency they can spend; instead, they are representative of adrenaline, extra effort, and the like, expended to gain benefits during and after Actions or Skill Tests. Additional Successes will traditionally be additional numeric benefits-e.g., Dealing more damage with a weapon, finding more loot, unearthing more information, and the like. If multiple Additional Successes are available, you may spend more AP to select multiple rewards, but each can only be chosen once.

**GAINING ACTION POINTS**
Whenever a character passes a Skill Test with more Successes than the test requires, they gain 1 Action Point. This is then added to the Action Point (AP) section on their Character Tab. No character can have more AP than their Agility Attribute.

**EXPENDING ACTION POINTS**
Once you have Action Points, you may expend them in one of two ways; to Re-roll a Skill Dice or to gain Additional Success.
* **Re-Roll a Skill Dice:** When making a Skill Test, after rolling your dice but before determining if you Succeed or Fail the Test, you may expend 1 AP to re-roll one dice in the test. Once a dice is re-rolled in this manner, it cannot be re-rolled again, and you must accept the second result.
* **Additional Success:** Upon a successful Skill Test, you may expend 1 AP to generate an Additional Success reward, which is extra benefits from the completion of the test. In Pick your Path Actions, there is always a list of example Additional Successes you can choose from, but when Creating your Own,

> "The truth is you lost an expensive piece of army-issue equipment. That suit is going to come out of your pay, and you will remain in this man's army until you are five hundred and ten years old, which is the number of years it will take for you to pay for a Mark II Powered Combat Armor you have lost!" - Arch Dornan

## TRUTHS AND EQUIPMENT

The world of Fallout is filled with things that can make your life easier, harder, or simply end it all altogether, be that a new set of Power Armor, a missile heading in the wrong direction, or even the overwhelming nuclear fallout left by a war few even remember. In Wasteland Wanderer, most, if not all, of these things are represented by Truths. We briefly discuss Truths in Chapter 3: Creating your Character (pg.50), but here, we will instead discuss the mechanical use of Truths when you engage in the moment-to-moment gameplay of Wasteland Wanderer. Mechanically, a Truth helps represent a definitive fact in the world of your game.

**Example: Using Truths in an Encounter**
Ben's character, Nicholas Rose, has entered a Help! Encounter (pg.164) with a generated NPC and some Foes, which in this case are a Trader and two Raider Scavvers, all arguing over a locked safe on the road. It's likely that the Raiders will kill the Trader if they don't, so Ben decides that Nick will attempt to De-escalate the situation (pg.137). He decides that Nick will try to make some threats, intimidating the Raiders into backing off from the situation with a STR (Speech) Skill test, and checks Nick's Truths to see if anything might help. In his character description, Ben has listed that Nick has the Truths Tall, Muscular, and Marked with scars-Truths he believes would make intimidating the Raiders easier, so he reduces the difficulty of the upcoming Skill Test by 1.

For example, a Deathclaw with the Truth Hungry will always make actions to satiate their hunger, a location with the Truth Irradiated is going to be dangerous to enter, and a .44 Revolver with the Truth Reliable is likely to not misfire. Equipment in Wasteland Wanderer fulfills a similar space; each piece of equipment your character carries is a Truth to them; your Inventory Tab acts as a correlating point for these Truths and demonstrates what they have access to when moving through their story. In short, Truths tell us how something operates in the world. In game, Truths come up most often to inform our decisions for our characters and to help us determine both Obstacles and Aids when making a Skill check.

For these purposes, they fulfill four different distinct effects:
* **They make something possible:** The fact that this Truth is present allows you to achieve a goal. For example, a character wanting to perform a Small Guns skill test will require a Gun! Another example would be a Yao Guai with the Deaf and Blind Truth would now be nice and easy to sneak by something a Yao Guai without certainty wouldn't be.
* **They make something easier:** This Truth reduces the difficulty of a Skill Test linked to it by 1 (to a minimum of 0). For example, an Expertly Crafted set of Binoculars would make Survival tests using them easier due to the increased level of vision, or a Pliable Merchant would be easier to Barter with.
* **They make something impossible:** This Truth prevents an action from being taken, completely blocking a potential solution. For example, a Reinforced Door would be unable to be blown apart, no matter how many explosives are used, a Broken Combat Shotgun cannot be fired, and a Raider with a Broken Leg could not sprint after anyone.
* **They make something harder:** This Truth increases the difficulty of a Skill Test linked to it by 1 (to a maximum of 4). For example, a Rusty Machete doesn't cut as well, a Crumbling Building offers less cover for someone hiding out from a Radstorm, and a Sharp Eyed Brotherhood Paladin is harder to Sneak past.

Use Truths to help guide your decision-making when possible and to aid in the formation of the narrative you are crafting with your Wasteland Wanderer story. Truths are an excellent framework for quickly determining the matter-of-fact states within an encounter, and when understood, allow for quick and natural choices.

## THE ORACLE

Sometimes, it doesn't matter how well you've planned or how many roll tables you have access to; sometimes, an answer just doesn't present itself; when that happens, we turn to The Oracle. Rather than a mystic old woman who dabbles in far too much jet, the Oracle is a simple system of generating a yes/no answer to an otherwise difficult-to-answer question. In simplest terms, the Oracle is used when the answer is more important than the mechanical structure of how you obtain it. When you need to 'Ask the Oracle' a question, follow these five steps:

**STEP 1: ASK YOUR QUESTION**
First, ask yourself a simple yes/no question. You can ask all sorts of questions like "Will this barrel explode if I shoot it?", "What's the likelihood I get stopped by Raiders on my way to Diamond City?" or "Does getting hit by this deathclaw throw me across the room?". Once asked, move to...

**STEP 2: DETERMINE HOW LIKELY IT IS**
After asking the question, you need to determine whether you think the thing is Likely, Unlikely, or a 50/50 Chance. Use your gut and choose based on what feels right; this process is all about feel, not statistics. If you want something to be extremely likely or unlikely, we suggest splitting the question up into two or more smaller questions.

**STEP 3: ROLL FOR IT**
After determining how likely the outcome is, consult the bullet points below and roll as directed, following the answer you're given by the Oracle.
* **50/50 Chance:** Roll 2d20 and note the lowest result; the answer to your question is 'No' on a result of 1-10 and 'Yes' on a result of 11-20.
* **Likely Chance:** Roll a d20; the answer to your question is 'No' on a result of 1-5 and 'Yes' on a result of 6-20.
* **Unlikely Chance:** Roll 2d20 and note the highest result; the answer to your question is 'No' on a result of 1-15 and 'Yes' on a result of 16-20.

**STEP 4: INCORPORATE YOUR ANSWER**
Having rolled your dice, you have a simple answer to your question and can continue with your story!

## LUCK

Luck is a measure of your general fortune and works a little differently from your other Attributes. Luck, amongst other things, gives you access to a number of Luck points that can be used to change your fate. You start the game with a number of Luck points equal to half of your Luck Attribute. When you use a Luck Point in one of the ways noted below, you reduce the number of Luck Points you have by 1. Each time you complete a Blocker on your Main Quest, you gain 2 Luck Points; each time you complete a Side Quest, you gain 1 Luck Point. You may never have more Luck Points than your maximum or fewer Luck Points than 0.

**USING LUCK POINTS**
During play, you can use Luck Points in three ways, to Cheat the Oracle, Play the Odds, or Trying your Luck.
* **Cheat the Oracle:** Any time you 'Ask the Oracle' and would like to change the result, you may expend a Luck Point to re-roll one dice. You may only Cheat the Oracle once per question asked of it.
* **Play the Odds:** After rolling on any table, you may expend a Luck Point to increase or decrease the result of your roll by up to your Luck Attribute Rating.
* **Trying your Luck:** When you are about to make a Skill Test, you may instead expend a Luck Point to 'Try your Luck,' in which case, instead of determining your Target number normally, use your Luck Attribute as your Target Number. Rolling under your Target Number always results in a Critical Success in this way; however, rolling over it will always result in a Complication.

## HEALTH

If you want your character to live a long and healthy life (a rarity in the Wasteland), then you will need to keep an eye on their Health Points. Health Points (HP) are a representation of your character's physical well-being, how much blood they have left in their body, and how many bones are broken/unbroken. Over the course of your adventure, your character will inevitably lose and gain HP, representing your character taking and then healing wounds or other forms of damage. HP is tracked on your Character Sheet and starts with a value of your character's Endurance Attribute + 5; this is both your character's Maximum Health and starting Health.

Throughout play, you will be instructed regularly to Gain or Lose HP; whenever you are, you will also be given a numeric value (For example, Gain 2 HP, or Lose 2 HP). When you do, adjust your Health Track accordingly, either marking down Lost HP or adding back any Gained HP. Outside of being actively informed when to Gain or Lose HP, your character can also Lose HP when they take Damage.

> "Are you hurt? You don't look hurt. What do you need?" - Red

### DAMAGE

Characters will inevitably suffer Damage, which always equates to that character Losing HP equal to the Damage taken. More often than not, your character will take Damage when attacked by a Foe, suffer from a trap or hazard, or be exposed to Radiation. When you are instructed to take Damage, you lose HP equal to the Damage value. The Endure Action (pg.126) will allow you to reduce the amount of Damage you take when in Combat (pg.98).

**Example: Taking Damage**
Following the example in Using Truths in an Encounter, Nick Rose failed his Speech check and found himself in a nasty fight. One of the Raiders, not willing to back away from their prize, pulled a Pipe Pistol and shot Nick-causing him to take 1 Damage. Accordingly, Ben reduces Nick's HP by 1, as Damage is always converted into Lost HP, and decides he knows which Raider is getting punched in the face first.

### RADIATION DAMAGE

Sometimes, your character will not just suffer Damage; they will suffer Radiation Damage. Radiation Damage is a special kind of Damage that occurs when your character is exposed to radioactive materials, radiation-infused creatures, or other rad-laden threats. Radiation Damage acts in a similar manner to normal Damage, converting into Lost HP as usual; however, in addition to this, each time a character suffers Radiation Damage, they also gain the Injury Radiation Damage 1. Each time they suffer additional Radiation Damage, the value of this Injury increases by 1.

While your character is suffering from this Injury, they reduce their Maximum HP by the Injury's Value. I.e., if a character has the Radiation Damage 2 Injury, their Maximum HP is reduced by 2. Like any other Injury, Radiation Damage can be treated (Patch Up pg.130), but often, only RadAway is of any use in the purging of Radiation-though if a more narratively fulfilling opportunity arises, it would make for an interesting story!

## INJURIES

When your character Suffers enough Damage to be reduced to 0 HP, they will also Suffer an Injury. Injuries are additional Truths that are applied to your character in some circumstances, like being reduced to 0 HP, although other situations may cause the same to happen. Injuries are listed on your Character Tab and have no directly listed mechanics, instead being treated as a Truth that you must bear in mind while continuing your story in Wasteland Wanderer.

When you would suffer an Injury, grab 2d20 and roll for [INJURY]pg.217, declaring one dice as the location of the Injury and the second dice as the Injury itself. When rolling for the Injury, add one to your result for every point of Damage you Suffer beyond the amount needed to reduce you to 0. For example, if a character has 1 HP and Suffers 5 Damage, they would add 4 to their roll, as only 1 point of Damage would reduce them to 0, leaving 4 points left.

Some injuries are more severe than others and should have more severe effects. For example, a character who has suffered a Destroyed Arm will no longer be able to make use of a Big Gun or many other things. Meanwhile, a character suffering from a Crushed Tooth will just have a new smile-not even an uncommon one in the Wasteland. However, some Injuries are so severe that they may bring your character close to Death.

## DEATH

In Wasteland Wanderer, the death of your character is in your hands, to a degree. During your adventure, your character will likely gain multiple Injuries throughout their time in the Wasteland, and each time they do, you will need to ask yourself the question, "Would this kill them?" You are the only person who can answer this question, and if you struggle to, make use of The Oracle (pg.93). But a few guideposts for lethality would be asking yourself these additional questions:

* In their current situation, would this Injury make it impossible for my character to survive?
* Does this Injury remove a core aspect of the character I enjoy playing?
* Would this be a narratively satisfying moment for my character to die?
* Has my character accrued so many Injuries that it would make no sense for them to survive?

If your answer to any of these questions is Yes, then it may be time for this character's story to come to an end. In which case, you will need to write their Epilogue (pg.142) and begin a new story-perhaps one linked to the first, where a new Vault Dweller emerges to try and find the remains of their predecessor?

**Miraculous Escape**
Sometimes, a situation where it makes sense for your character to die, but it is in no way a narratively satisfying moment for it to happen. In those cases, you may spend all of your Luck Points (you must spend at least 1) to instead have a Miraculous Escape. To do so, roll a d20 to [MIRACULOUS ESACAPE] (pg.218) when you would suffer a fatal Injury. Instead, you are knocked unconscious and awake in a new situation, as dictated by the description on the table.

## COMBAT

Violence isn't just a promise in the Wasteland; it's a necessity. Your character is doomed to having to defend themselves eventually, be that against the smallest radroach or a bellowing Super Mutant Behemoth. At times, you will find your character In Danger (pg.120); when this happens, they are either being attacked or about to be attacked. At this time, you will have multiple methods of dealing with the issue, but in this section, we will be discussing how to meet violence with violence; other options are listed later in this book (pg.122).

### COMBAT FLOW

Once you begin an Encounter (pg.116) where Combat is a factor, you will take Turns against your enemies, with you taking one Action at a time, then a Foe acting once, before you acting again; continuing in this manner until either all the Foes have been defeated, or you have. Foes act in Threat Order (see Foes pg.100), with the Foe with the highest Threat acting first and then lower threat foes acting in a reductive order; if more than one Foe has the same Threat Value, then randomise which acts first with a d20 roll (or Ask the Oracle pg.93). The Foe Stat Block (pg.219) will state how a Foe acts, which once done, ends their Turn and allows you to take another Turn. Once all Foes have taken a Turn, then the highest Threat Foe will be the next to act, before following the same order as before. Once every Foe is Defeated (or you die alone and afraid in the Wasteland, with nothing but the Rad-vultures to pick at your bones), the Combat ends, and your story continues.

> "Enough words, then. Let our strength settle this." - Legate Lanius

### YOUR TURN

When you take a Turn in Combat, you will be able to Make an Action and Move. In Combat, Movement is abstracted rather than a hard and fast rule so how you move is mostly up to you and should be treated as a Truth for the Combat itself. For example, when a Combat starts, you decide according to the Encounter where your character is in relation to your enemies, be that In Reach, Close, Medium Distance, Long Distance, or Extreme Distance. This is a fluid Truth and may differ from Foe to Foe, but normally it's easier to picture this in your mind as you describe your scene. When you Move, simply change that Truth by a step, i.e., from Close to Reach, or from Long to Medium. You can always choose to not move if you'd like, perhaps stating that your character is lining up their shot, or winding up for a particularly brutal swing with their Super-Sledge.

An Action in Combat is always a Skill Test, following all the rules presented in Skill Tests (pg.82); meaning you may either Pick a Path or Make your Own. For ease, the Oppose Action (pg.138) is used to demonstrate making an attack in Wasteland Wanderer.

**GOAL**
Oppose Foe - Difficulty X*
When selecting a Foe to Oppose, the Difficulty of this Test is set to match their Threat Value.

**SOLUTIONS**
* Use a Thrown Weapon: AGI (Throwing)
* Use a Ranged Weapon: AGI (Small Guns) or PER (Energy Weapons) or END (Big Guns)
* Use a Melee Weapon: STR (Melee Weapons) or STR (Unarmed)

**SUGGESTED MODIFIERS**
* (+) Your target is within Reach (Small Guns, Energy Weapons, Big Guns)
* (+) Your target is in cover or protected in some way
* (+) You are surrounded or outnumbered (Melee Weapons, Unarmed)
* (-) You don't Move this Turn to aim
* (-) You have an ally fighting with you
* (-) Your Foe is Injured

| SUCCESS | FAILURE |
| :--- | :--- |
| You Defeat the Target Foe. | Reduce the Threat of the Foe by 1, to a minimum of 1. |

| ADDITIONAL SUCCESS | POTENTIAL COMPLICATIONS |
| :--- | :--- |
| Reduce the Threat of one Foe Close to your Target by 1 (to a minimum of 1)<br><br>Choose which Foe acts next<br><br>If using an Explosive Weapon, Defeat X additional Foes with lower Threat than the original target, where X is the number of Action Points spent | ■ A Foe gets a free Turn<br>■ Gain a [COMBAT STATE]pg.166<br>■ Your weapon runs out of ammunition and needs to be reloaded next Turn<br>■ Your weapon breaks or gains a new negative Truth<br>■ A Foe gains a new [COMBAT STATE] pg.166 |

Using the Oppose Action is the core method by which you will use an Action to Defeat a Foe, and follows all of the same guidance set forth in Skill Tests for determining a Goal, Solution, Obstacles, and making the Skill Test. To make the Oppose Action, you simply decide which Foe you wish for your character to try and Defeat, and follow the guidance of making a Skill Test. Once the Test is completed, if you have either made or summarily make your Move, you end your Turn and a Foe takes theirs.

**Defeating a Foe**
When you succeed on an Oppose Action, you will Defeat one or more Foes; a Defeated Foe is removed from Combat as no longer being a threat, after they have been either beaten, bludgeoned, shot, or otherwise dealt with. Once you have Defeated enough Foes to not be In Danger, you can [LOOT]pg.170 each Defeated Foe once.

### FOES

A story is often only as good as its antagonist, and in Wasteland Wanderer, your Foes are your antagonists. During Combat, after each of your Actions, the Foe with the highest Threat will take a Turn. To determine what a Foe will do, we look at their Stat Block. Each Foe in Wasteland Wanderer has a Stat Block that informs you of:
1.  Who your Foe is (NAME)
2.  Their Threat Value
3.  Their background
4.  Their Actions
5.  Any Special Abilities

> "Mutants sure are hard to kill, huh? Thanks for the assist." - Diamond City Security

**FOE ACTIONS**
* Aggressive (x-x)
* Cautious (x-x)
* Crafty (x-x)

When you are in Danger or in Combat, after you have taken a Turn, one Foe will take their Turn. To do so, they take one of the Actions listed in their Stat Block, either an Aggressive, Cautious, or Crafty Action. To determine which is taken, you can either Roll a d20 and resolve the selected Action, pick the most appropriate Action to match the story, or Ask the Oracle. Should you choose to roll, and the result feels narratively incorrect, instead change the Action to the one that feels right. Remembering that the Foes you face will all have their own agendas and will try to fulfill them however they can.

Once you have decided which Action the Foe is taking, read through the Action and have the Foe do as it says. If the Action has an -OR- clause, pick the option that makes the most sense. If the Action has an -AND- clause, have the Foe complete the Action in the order presented, from top to bottom. Once the Action has been completed, the Foe completes its Turn, and your character may Act again!

**Example: Combat Turn**
After taking a bullet, Nick Rose (Ben's character) turns on the two Raider Scavvers around the safe, clenching his fingers through his knuckle dusters; Combat has begun. In the first Turn, Ben decides to have Nick, who is within Reach of one of the Raiders, use the Oppose Action to try and punch that Raider unconscious. Running through the Skill Test steps, he rolls a Str (Unarmed) Skill Test at Difficulty 2 against one of the Scavvers and succeeds, Defeating the Raider with a quick haymaker to the side of the head. As he chose to not move, this ends Nick's Turn. As there is only one Foe left, Ben rolls a d20 for that Scavvers Action, rolling a 12, which causes the Scavver to take the Cautious Action of diving for cover to get away. Ben decides that the Scavver is a little afraid of Nick, having watched him nearly punch a friend's head clean off, which means the Action makes perfect sense. With the Scavvers Action completed, it's Nick's Turn once more, leaving him to crack his knuckles and descend on a Raider about to have a really bad day.

### COMBAT STATES

When entering a Combat with Foes, you will need to determine the Combat State. A combat state is a Truth linked to the Combat and its Location, rather than any one combatant. When stating a Combat, you may either roll for a [COMBAT STATE]pg.166 or choose one from the table that is the most appropriate for the Encounter as it has been demonstrated so far. Many of the combat states listed are purely descriptive, while others represent things that could have specific effects as always, use these tables as a baseline, rather than the exact description to follow.

> "If I was the assassin, I'd be up on that ridge. Or if I didn't care about escaping, maybe that near tower, or the landing pad behind us." - Craig Boone

Some effects may allow you to change the combat state during Combat; if they do, remember that the states also represent positioning, unnoticed dangers, and even reinforcements, so don't be afraid of writing in sudden and varied alterations in combat states to keep things interesting.
