# Chapter 6

# QUESTS

**Side Quests**

In Fallout, the narrative has always been driven by Quests. The missions undertaken by the various protagonists of the series help define not only them but also the marks they leave on the Wasteland. Each character, your own included, has a Main Quest-their main driving force and the reason they left the Vault in the first place; but throughout their time moving after their main Goal, they will inevitably pick up Side Quests. During character creation, you will have created your Main Quest, but as you play through the game, you will meet various NPCs and situations that will leave you able to take on a Side Quest. In this chapter, we will look at how to generate Side Quests, how they operate, and what types of goals you may take on.

## CREATING A SIDE QUEST

In many Encounters, Actions, and other moments of play, you will be asked to generate a [SIDE QUEST]pg.146. When you are, you will engage in a three-step process that will outline the following information:

■ The Quest's Reward (pg.146)
■ The Quest's Goal (pg.146)
■ The Quest's Location (pg.147)

## STEP 1: REWARD

When being offered a Side Quest, the most often asked question is "What's in it for me?". The first step of Quest Creation answers this immediately. To do so, roll a d20 to determine your offered [REWARD]pg.194. After you have completed the remaining Steps, you may find that the offered reward doesn't match the mission you're asked for. No one is going to accept a single Stack of Caps for hunting down a Deathclaw after all! In those situations, you may either Spend a Luck Point to re-roll the reward, or attempt a Cha (Barter) Skill test at difficulty 2 to 'renegotiate' the terms. After you have determined this, note the Reward in the Quest section of your Data Tab. Once you have generated your Reward, it's time to determine the Goal.

## STEP 2: GOAL

Determining the Goal of your objective is a two-step process. You begin by determining what Type of Goal you have, followed by the Goal specifics. The Goal itself should be linked to the person giving it, as it's their Side Quest you're completing. So, as you're creating the Goal, think about WHY this NPC is giving you the Goal, what they get from it, and why they haven't done it themselves. To Generate a Goal, roll a d20 on [GOAL TYPE]pg.196 and then on the appropriate [GOAL]pg.197 type generator. Each Goal has both a Description of the Goal and a question to ask yourself when creating it, a small prompt that should aid in determining the narrative reasoning behind the Quest. Once you have listed down the Goal of your Side Quest on your Data Tab, move to Step 3 to determine the Side Quest Location.

146
FALLOUT WWasteland Wanderer

## STEP 3: LOCATION

The final step of generating a quest is determining where it is! To do so, note down the name of the NPC that gave you the Quest in the Sata Tab, and then generate the Location of your Goal. To do so, roll a d20 and list the result in the Location section of the Data Tab. If you happen to roll the location you are currently in, you may re-roll if you choose, or think about why the Goal is so close! Now that you know where your Goal is, it's time to wrap the Goal and location together to determine the what and why of the Side Quest. This is completely up to your own imagination, but here are some common examples:

■ If the Quest requires you to kill, fetch, or deliver something, this is the location to which you must kill, fetch, or deliver the something.
■ If the Quest requires you to find something out or gather information, this location may have a clue that will help you find what you need.
■ If the Quest involves a certain faction, they may have an outpost here (which you can mark down on your map).
■ If a Quest seems rather simple, perhaps the quest giver has traveled to this location, and you will need to collect your reward from them there.

Note that while visiting the related location is often the simplest way of resolving a Quest, it may not be the only way. If, during your travels, you feel that you are able to take the Complete Side Quest (pg.125) Action, you should do so, even if you have not visited the related location. Once your side quest has a reward, a goal, and a related location, you are ready to head out into the Wasteland and complete it!

Chapter 6 QUESTS
147
